
Paradox Wikis
Victoria 3 Wiki

Search
Search Victoria 3 Wiki
Log in
Navigation menu
PageDiscussion
ReadEditEdit sourceView history
Victoria 3 Wiki
Recent changes
Random page
Paradox Wikis
- Main portal
- Wikis discord
- Contact us
- Style guidelines
V3 links
- Forums
- Game discord
- Mods
- Store
- Twitch
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Special pages
Printable version
Permanent link
Page information
Pops
Jump to navigationJump to search
Please help with verifying or updating older sections of this article.
At least some were last verified for version 1.9.

Pops
Culture • Religion
Profession • Qualifications
Standard of Living • Needs
Migration

Every variation of profession, culture, religion, and workplace in the world gets its own unique pop.
Pops, short for population or originally an acronym of Part of Population, are a country's lifeblood. Every combination of profession, culture, religion, and workplace in each state in the the world gets its own unique pop. The number of individuals in each pop can vary from mere handfuls to millions. At any given time, there are many tens of thousands of pops in the game.


Contents
1	Defining characteristics
1.1	Culture
1.1.1	Assimilation
1.2	Religion
1.2.1	Conversion
1.3	Profession
1.3.1	Social hierarchy
1.4	Workplace
2	Other characteristics
2.1	Loyalty and radicalism
2.2	Wealth
2.2.1	Standard of living
2.2.2	Political strength
2.3	Literacy
2.3.1	Education access
2.4	Qualifications
2.5	Workforce and dependents
3	Influencing pops
4	Population growth
5	References
Defining characteristics
Pops are defined by five characteristics: culture, religion, state of residence, profession, and workplace. Each pop represents all the people who have the same characteristics, and the size of the pop, how many actual people are represented. Thus, even if a country's pops are all the same culture and religion in a single state, there are at least as many pops as there are professions per workplace.

Culture
Main article: Culture
The culture of a pop determines primarily, along with its religion, what acceptance status a pop has, based on the country's Citizenship law and the culture's relationship to the country's primary cultures. Each nation has one or more primary cultures which always have Full Acceptance Full Acceptance status.

Cultures may also have obsessions for certain goods. Certain cultures start with an obsession, and all cultures may gain or lose obsessions during the game.

Assimilation
Main article: Acceptance
Status	Score	Migration
desire
Violent Hostility Violent Hostility	0-19	100
Cultural Erasure Cultural Erasure	20-39	100
Open Prejudice Open Prejudice	40-59	50
Second-class Citizen Second-class Citizen	60-79	20
Full Acceptance Full Acceptance	80-100	0
Each pop has an acceptance value that places it in one of the statuses. Besides the pop's culture and religion, this value is also affected by the presence of State status homelands.png cultural homelands and recently formed cultural communities, among other factors. A pop's acceptance status affects many other characteristics, such as the pop's wages, political strength, and even whether the pop can work in certain professions or buildings.

Pops may Assimilate.png assimilate to a different culture if it increases their acceptance status. Assimilation is generally blocked for both Violent Hostility Violent Hostility statuses. Assimilation can only occur if there is a more accepted culture present in the state. The base rate of assimilation is 0.2% per month. The Promote National Values Promote National Values decree increases this by +100% to 0.4% monthly and having the educational law Public Schools Public Schools enacted multiplies this by +12.5% in incorporated states per level of the Education Education institution. Cultural Erasure Cultural Erasure and Open Prejudice Open Prejudice statuses have +5% and +15% assimilation respectively. Assimilation is reduced in pops with Political radical.png radicals.

Religion
Main article: Religion
The religion of a pop decides in part, along with its culture, whether it is accepted or discriminated, based on the country's Church and State law and the religion's relationship to the country's state religion. Similar to cultures, each country has a state religion which is always accepted.

Certain religions have taboos against certain goods. These work opposite to obsessions: pops are much less likely to buy said good. Taboos do not change during the game. Taboos are determined by the default religion of a pop's culture, not the actual religion of the pop; see the list of cultures for the default religions of each culture.

Conversion
Pops whose religion has a low acceptance value may Convert.png convert to one with a higher value. The base rate of conversion is 0.2% per month. The Promote National Values Promote National Values decree increases this by +100% to 0.4% monthly, and having the educational law Religious Schools Religious Schools enacted multiplies this by +20% in incorporated states per level of the Education Education institution. The power bloc statue for a Religious Convocation increases conversion by 25%. Conversion is reduced by −90% in State status unincorporated.png unincorporated states. Conversion is also reduced in pops with Political radical.png radicals.

Profession
Main article: Profession
Professions reflect the types of jobs that pops carry out in the buildings where they work. A pop's profession determines its social stratum and affects its base wage, what other professions it might qualify for, and particularly which political interest groups it's prone to supporting. Investing in industries that provide job opportunities for the professions the player wants to encourage in their country is key to the "society building" gameplay of Victoria 3.

Social hierarchy
Ambox outdated info.png
Please help with verifying or updating this section. It was last verified for version 1.10.
Social hierarchy determines which professions or pops belong to which social classes, and the classes in turn to which social strata. There are currently two social hierarchies. Various effects and modifiers can be applied to each social class and strata, in addition to professions directly.

Workplace
Main article: Building
A pop's workplace is simply the building which employs it, or if Pop unemployed.png unemployed, the state where the pop lives.

Other characteristics
A pop's other characteristics vary by circumstance. These characteristics also change as individuals are born, die, join, or leave the pop. When individuals change from one pop to another – for example by assimilation or change in profession, they take a proportion of these characteristics with them from their old pop to the new one.

Loyalty and radicalism
Individuals have one of three stances towards the country and its government: Political loyalist.png loyalist, Neutral neutral, or Political radical.png radical. Pop loyalty strongly affects interest group approval and political movement radicalism. Radical individuals also cause State status turmoil.png turmoil, with the base turmoil equal to the percentage of radical individuals in the state.

Pop loyalty is gained mostly by pops increasing in standard of living or by having a very high government Legitimacy.png legitimacy. Pop radicalism is gained by the opposite, as well as discrimination, being below expected standard of living, and unfulfilled political movements. Events or being conquered can also increase pop loyalty or radicalism. Note that an increase to loyalty first makes radical individuals neutral and vice-versa, that is pops always change loyalty by only one step, and no pop can contain both loyalists and radicals at the same time.

The number of loyalists and radicals gained by loyalty changes, particularly from standard of living changes, are modified by a large number of factors, including several laws.

Wealth
A pop's wealth is a major factor for several non-defining characteristics. Pops accumulate wealth over time as long as their weekly income exceeds their weekly expenses. Conversely, if a pop's expenses exceed its income, its wealth declines. Several pop mechanics are multiplied by wealth, with wealthier pops generally gaining more benefits.

Standard of living
Main article: Standard of living
In the absence of other modifiers, a pop's SOL.png standard of living level is equal to its wealth level. Pops with a higher standard of living have larger – and more expensive – needs, meaning that they consume more and higher-quality goods. A rise to a higher standard of living also makes a pop less Political radical.png radical and more Political loyalist.png loyal. Conversely, drops in a pop's standard of living are a quick route to increased radicalism. Additionally, pops have an expected standard of living, and become more radical over time while they are below that level. The expected standard of living increases based on Literacy.png literacy and certain society technologies increase this effect.

Political strength
See also: Political strength
A pop's political strength is based primarily on its wealth level – modified by many factors, such as discrimination, whether the pop lives in an State status unincorporated.png unincorporated state or the State status capital.png capital, and – under certain laws – the pop's profession. Individuals in a pop can support various interest groups, increasing those groups' clout by the individuals' proportion of the pop's political strength. Most individuals, particularly dependents, are IG politically inactive.png politically unaligned or disenfranchised and support no interest group; they generate no political strength.

Each pop's most supported interest group is shown as its primary interest group on pop overview windows. If most individuals are IG politically inactive.png politically unaligned, that is shown instead.

Literacy
A pop's Literacy.png literacy score represents approximately what percent of individuals in that pop can read and write. Literacy is a major factor for most qualifications, thereby affecting for which professions individuals can change to. Literacy also affects a country's research by limiting the maximum amount of innovation for directed research and increasing the amount of technology spread.

A high average literacy also increases a culture's Fervor.png fervor up to a maximum of 25.

Education access
Literacy increases over time toward a pop's education access. Base education access is +0.5% per wealth, which is further increased by certain society technologies. The Education Education institution also increases education access and certain professions have inherent additional education access. The Promote Social Mobility Promote Social Mobility decree increases education access by +25%, and certain events or other sources increase education access as well.
Source	Education access
Rationalism Rationalism	+1% Per wealth
Academia Academia	+0.5% Per wealth
Empiricism Empiricism	+0.5% Per wealth
IG trait pious fiction.png Pious Fiction	−10%
Profession	Education access
Pop clerks.png Clerks	+25%
Pop engineers.png Engineers	+25%
Pop academics.png Academics	+50%
Pop bureaucrats.png Bureaucrats	+50%
Pop clergymen.png Clergymen	+50%
Education institution law	Per level effects
Religious Schools Religious Schools	+10% Access
Public Schools Public Schools	+12.5% Access
Private Schools Private Schools	+0.5% Access per wealth
Companies	Education access
Ericsson (Flag of Sweden Sweden)	+0.5% Per wealth
If a pop's literacy is above its education access, it slowly declines as literate individuals die over time.

Qualifications
Main article: Qualifications
Qualifications represent individuals' ability to perform other professions and thus to change to them. Each month, the workforce gains qualifications for each other profession based on those factors such as literacy, wealth, and discrimination. Qualifications can be seen as a tooltip over the workforce number on the economy tab of a pop's detail window

Workforce and dependents
The individuals that make up a pop are divided into workforce and dependents. The workforce are employed by buildings and collect a wage or dividend from them in return. Dependents represent individuals who are not formally employable, or are subordinate to a primary breadwinner within a household (such as child workers if a country's laws allow that). Most dependents do collect a small income from odd jobs, and this does not count towards a pop's income for income taxes.

By default[1], 25% of each pop are members of the workforce and the remaining 75% are dependents. This ratio is modified for certain professions and by certain laws, particularly the Rights of Women laws which can increase the workforce ratio by up to +15%. The IG trade unions.png Trade Unions' interest group trait IG trait solidarity.png Solidarity also gives a +5% bonus to this ratio. When the ratio changes or if pops are made into dependents, such as battle casualties, the current ratio drifts back towards the ideal ratio over time. Modifiers to workforce ratio are additive with the base percentage, so having the Women's Suffrage Women's Suffrage law and a powerful Trade Unions with Solidarity activated can boost the workforce ratio to 50%.

Dependents consume half as much needs as a working pop, so the higher the ratio of working adults the more a pop consumes.

Influencing pops
Pops cannot be interacted with directly. Instead, other actions affect pops in a variety of ways. Pops are accepted or discriminated against based on a country's laws. Their profession depends on available jobs and the pops' qualifications, which depend on the pops' wealth, literacy, and other factors. Often, an action that benefits one set of pops negatively impacts another set of pops, even if only by reducing their share of power in the country.

Thus, unhappy, radical pops cannot be easily and quickly sated, and any trouble must be headed off well in advance.

Population growth
See also: Birth rate and mortality, Migration
Pops grow by two means, natural growth and migration.

Natural growth is the pop's birth rate minus its mortality rate. The base birth and mortality rates are based primarily on a pop's standard of living, with both rates decreasing at higher standards of living, and base mortality decreasing at a faster rate; thus – without other impacting factors – pops grow faster at higher standards of living up to around a SoL of 15, where it starts to flatten out again. Other common factors contributing to birth or death rate are the Rights of Women laws, Health system Health System institution, modifiers from events, and pollution and State status devastation.png devastation in the state. Since modifiers are almost always applied to either birth- or death rate, the effects for better or worse, are much more pronounced at a low SoL.

Migration comes in two forms, intra-market migration and mass migration. In either case, the Migration laws determine which pops can migrate to or from a country. Each state has a migration attraction score, based primarily on the state's average standard of living, and pops tend to migrate intra-market accordingly. For mass migrations, there is a State status mass migration.png migration target instead, which attracts pops of that culture.

A state with less than 5000 population per arable land[2] gains the scaling modifier Sparsely Populated giving up to +50% birth rate.

References
 Defined by NPops.WORKING_ADULT_RATIO_BASE
 from /Victoria 3/game/common/defines/00_defines.txt: LOW_POP_THRESHOLD = 5000
Game concepts
Pops	Pops • Acceptance • Culture • Migration • Needs • Professions • Religion • Standard of living
Government	Government • Capacities • Characters • Decrees • Institutions • Laws • Technology
Politics	Elections • Ideology • Interest group • Political lobby • Political movement • Political party • Revolution
Economy	Buildings • Goods • Harvest condition • Infrastructure • Market • Production methods • State • Treasury
Diplomacy	Diplomacy • Diplomatic action • Diplomatic play • Power bloc • Ranks • Subjects • Treaties
Warfare	Warfare • Land warfare • Naval warfare • Wargoals • Conscription
Others	Countries • Decisions • Events • Journal • Objectives • Vickypedia
Categories: Potentially outdated1.9Game concepts
Privacy policyAbout Victoria 3 WikiDisclaimersMobile view
Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0Powered by MediaWiki

Games
Discover
Our Brands
Browse
Play on Paradox technology
Community
Paradox Forums
Paradox Wikis
Support
About
News
About us
Careers
Join our playtests
Media contact
Social Media
Legal Information
EU Online Dispute Resolution
Report Illegal Content
