
Paradox Wikis
Victoria 3 Wiki

Search
Search Victoria 3 Wiki
Log in
Navigation menu
PageDiscussion
ReadEditEdit sourceView history
Victoria 3 Wiki
Recent changes
Random page
Paradox Wikis
- Main portal
- Wikis discord
- Contact us
- Style guidelines
V3 links
- Forums
- Game discord
- Mods
- Store
- Twitch
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Special pages
Printable version
Permanent link
Page information
Treasury
Jump to navigationJump to search
Please help with verifying or updating older sections of this article.
At least some were last verified for version 1.10.

Economy
Buildings
List of buildings • Unique buildings
Companies • Flavored companies
Market
Goods • Needs
Production methods
List of production methods
Treasury

Overview of the weekly treasury balance.
The country's treasury is its gold reserve or loans. It increases or decreases based on the country's budget which reflects its total sum of income and expenses each week.

The budget balance is updated automatically each Monday. Most regular income and expenses, such as construction, are weekly. There are a handful of lump-sum gains or costs such as the Treaty take on debt.png Take on Debt treaty article, nationalization or privatization of buildings, and certain other effects.

Every country (including subjects) has its own treasury and budget, and all money is nominalized as pounds for all countries. There are no direct inflationary effects over time; thus, a pound in 1836 is equal to a pound in 1936.

If a country ceases to exist, its debt or gold reserve simply disappears.


Contents
1	Gold reserve
1.1	Gold reserve limit
2	Credit
2.1	Credit limit
3	Investment pool
3.1	Contributions
4	Budget
4.1	National income
4.1.1	Taxation
4.1.1.1	Unrealized taxes
4.2	National expenses
4.2.1	Government and military wages
5	References
Gold reserve
The gold reserve is a country's national stockpile of cash. While a country is debt-free, any budget surplus increases the gold reserve. Similarly, any budget deficit reduces the gold reserve.

A large gold reserve provides no direct benefit aside from allowing for extended deficit spending, such as during a costly war.

Gold reserve limit
Each country has a gold reserve limit, which is a soft cap equal to 20% of its annual gross domestic product (GDP)[1], over which each surplus pound has diminishing returns on the gold reserve. For example, if a country has an enormous stockpile of gold, a surplus of £10K may only increase the stockpile by as little as £2K, meaning that the rest of the money has been wasted. Hence, a country that finds its gold reserves filling up may want to consider finding a way to reinvest some of that money to avoid such waste, or lower taxes to have the pops keep the money instead.

Credit
Interest rate
Additive sources	Amount
Base	20%
Banking Banking	−2%
Central Banking Central Banking	−2%
Mutual Funds Mutual Funds	−2%
International Exchange Standards International Exchange Standards	−2%
Modern Financial Instruments Modern Financial Instruments	−2%
Multiplier sources	Amount
Great power.png Great power	−50%
Major power.png Major power	−25%
Laissez-Faire Laissez-Faire	−25%
IG trait treasury bonds.png Treasury Bonds	−10%
Declared Bankruptcy (decaying)	+50%
Insignificant power.png Insignificant power	+25%
Unrecognized major power.png Unrecognized major power	+50%
Unrecognized regional power.png Unrecognized regional power	+75%
Unrecognized power.png Unrecognized power	+100%
If the gold reserve is empty, then any budget deficit automatically results in taking on loans against its national credit. Loans incur a weekly interest expense based on the total principal borrowed and the country's annual interest rate; this expense is paid to pops with ownership shares. The annual interest rate of a country is determined primarily by society technology, rank, and recognition status.

While a country has any loans, any budget surplus is automatically applied to pay down the principal. Additionally, another country can propose a Treaty take on debt.png Take on Debt treaty article. If the other country agrees, this transfers the entire principal to the initiating country.

As interest is paid to pops with ownership shares, maintaining loans can be a way of increasing the wealth, and thus political power, of certain professions based on the ownership production methods used. Additionally, deficit spending in order to construct new buildings or mobilize a country's army is often necessary. However, as the principal grows, the interest can become a larger and larger budget expense to the point that the country is unable to pay down the principal even when not spending on construction or mobilization.

Credit limit
A country's credit limit is the maximum amount of principal it can borrow before going into default. This limit is based on its buildings' current cash reserves plus £100K plus 50% of its GDP[2]. Buildings start with a maximum cash reserves of £25k per level, except Building trade center.png Trade Centers which have a maximum of £5k per level and ownership buildings which have a maximum of £10K per level. The technology Postal Savings Postal Savings increases the maximum by +20%. The actual cash reserve at any moment depends on a buildings profitability, but it tends to either the maximum for profitable buildings or zero for unprofitable buildings.

If a country's loan principal is 50% or more of its credit limit, then its economy is considered unhealthy.

If the country goes into default, all construction is paused and a −5% penalty to Military offense.png offense, Military defense.png defense, and throughput is immediately applied, this penalty increase by −1% each week up to a maximum of −50%. If a country in default achieves a positive budget balance, whether by increasing income or reducing expenses, these penalties are removed.

While a country is in default, it can declare bankruptcy to erase its total debt and thereby exit default. Declaring bankruptcy cancels all buildings in the construction queue, wipes out the cash reserves of all buildings, sets all active institutions to level 1. 10% of pops become more Political radical.png radical and pops with ownership shares become an additional +5% more radical for each share they own. Additionally, the following penalties are applied, decaying over 10 years:

Prestige.png −75% Prestige
+50% Loan interest rate
−75% Migration attraction
−10% Market access price impact
−100% Welfare payments
−95% Institution size change speed
Power bloc leverage.png −75% Leverage
Military offense.png −75% Offense
Military defense.png −75% Defense
Warning Forces privatization of all nationalized buildings
Investment pool
In addition to the national treasury, each country has access to an investment pool that represents certain pops' investment in the economy. The investment pool can be spent either on the construction of buildings or on privatizing nationally-owned or workforce-owned buildings, as determined by the country's economic system.

Buildings constructed from the investment pool use a separate, private construction queue. When the investment pool is used for construction, it appears in the budget as a temporary income called Investment Pool Transfer. If investment pool contributions exceed expenses, the contributions accumulate and can be spent later. Note that the wages of construction sector employees are always paid by the national treasury.

If the investment pool privatizes a nationally-owned building, that cost is paid direct to the treasury, increasing the gold reserve or paying a portion of loan principal.

Under the Command Economy Command Economy law, the investment pool is seized entirely as a lump sum income and all contributions are stopped, even if an eligible pop receives dividends.

Contributions
The investment pool gains funds from pop contributions. These contributions are based on dividends paid to certain professions with ownership shares, namely Pop aristocrats.png aristocrats, Pop bureaucrats.png bureaucrats, Pop capitalists.png capitalists, Pop clergymen.png clergymen, Pop engineers.png engineers, Pop farmers.png farmers, Pop machinists.png machinists, and Pop shopkeepers.png shopkeepers; if another pop type has ownership shares, such as in a workforce-owned building, those pops do not contribute anything to the investment pool. Each type of pop contributes a percentage of its dividends to the investment pool. The default values for investment pool contribution, as well as when they are paid, are the following[3]:

Pop farmers.png Farmers – 10%
Through workforce-owned buildings.
Pop machinists.png Machinists – 10%
Through workforce-owned buildings.
Pop bureaucrats.png Bureaucrats – 15%
Through financial districts with Government Run.
Pop engineers.png Engineers – 15%
Through workforce-owned buildings.
Pop shopkeepers.png Shopkeepers – 20%
Through workforce-owned buildings.
Through shopkeeper-owned companies.
Pop clergymen.png Clergymen – 20%
Through manor houses.
Through financial districts with Increased Clergy Oversight.
Pop aristocrats.png Aristocrats – 20%
Through manor houses.
Through aristocrat-owned companies.
Pop capitalists.png Capitalists – 30%
Through financial districts.
Through capitalist-owned companies.
Industry Banned Industry Banned adds +25% contributions to Pop aristocrats.png aristocrats, for a total of 45%.

Reinvestment from pops in ownership buildings that own subsistence buildings is multiplied by
0.5
⋅
the share of levels owned
 that are subsistence buildings
{\displaystyle 0.5\cdot {\text{the share of levels owned}}{\text{ that are subsistence buildings}}}

Factors that affect the size of dividends, and thus base contributions are as follows:

Profitability – The gross profit (revenue − (wages + input costs)) of a building owned by a contributing pop determines how much dividends are paid out.
The building's cash reserves – The abstracted stockpile of a building determines how much profit is used to expand the reserve instead of paying dividends. A full reserve means all of the profit is paid out to the owners.
The building's ownership – Each ownership type can make different pops owners. To get more investment pool, the pops with the highest contribution factor need to own the building.
These contributions can be boosted by increasing investment pool contribution efficiency; that is, the amount the pop contributes counts for more, rather than taking more from the pop. Factors that are affect investment pool contribution efficiency are:

The Economic System law – Each law has a different set of efficiency modifiers.
Interest group traits – The IG industrialists.png Industrialists and IG landowners.png Landowners have traits that increase the investment pool contribution efficiency for capitalists and aristocrats respectively, when they have high approval.
Postal Savings Postal Savings technology – +15% Pop bureaucrats.png Bureaucrats, Pop engineers.png engineers, Pop farmers.png farmers, Pop machinists.png machinists, and Pop shopkeepers.png shopkeepers investment efficiency.
Note that the amount of dividend taxes has no direct influence on the investment pool because this contribution is done before taxes.

Investment pool contributions are scaled based on low GDP. Below £50M, contribution efficiency scales up towards a maximum of ×3.

Budget
A country's national budget is the sum total of its income and expenses.

There are many forms of income and expenses which are impacted by laws, diplomacy, and events.

National income
The types of income are:

Taxes – Income from pops, divided up by type as below.
Tariffs – Income from imports and exports. The rate is determined by the current trade policy and market good policy.
Minting – Income generated as a portion of GDP. Increased by technologies and by Gold Mines and Gold fields. Minting from GDP is calculated as 1/1000[4] of yearly GDP per week or 5.2%, capped at a base of 200K. Multipliers and other sources of minting are not capped.
Government Dividends – Income paid to the national treasury from profits on government owned buildings.
Investment Pool Transfer – Temporary income paid from the investment pool to offset the cost of construction goods during the construction of eligible buildings.
Diplomatic Pacts – Income from other countries such as; subjects, bankrolling, or war reparations.
Additional Income – Income from events or other uncategorized sources.
Taxation
See also: Economy laws#Taxation
Taxes are usually a country's primary income source. There are two general types of taxes and five common specific taxes: Consumption, Land, Per Capita, Income, and Dividend.

Poll taxes are flat taxes levied on all pops of a certain type. Each pop liable to pay the tax pays the same amount, regardless of actual income, thus disproportionately affecting pops with lower income.[5]
Land taxes are levied exclusively on Pop peasants.png peasants and Pop farmers.png farmers working on subsistence farms.
Per capita taxes are levied on all pops except Pop peasants.png peasants and Pop slaves.png slaves.
Heathen taxes are levied on pops' whose religion is discriminated. Primarily, these are applied by the laws Millet System Millet System and People of the Book People of the Book; Flag of Caucasian Imamate Caucasian Imamate can gain this as well by completing the DLC Sphere of Influence.png Gazawat journal entry.
Percentage taxes use a tax rate rather than a flat amount. This tends to bring more money from wealthier pops as they have higher wages and more expensive purchases.
Consumption taxes are levied on pops' purchases of specific goods. Levying a consumption tax costs Hud authority.png authority. Every individual that buys the good pays the tax.
Income taxes are levied on pops' wages. Only wages are taxed; subsistence income is exempt.
Dividend taxes are levied on pops' dividends.
Law	Taxation
Type	Very low	Low	Medium	High	Very high
There are no tax brackets, such that even Graduated Taxation Graduated Taxation – despite its name – applies the same tax rate to all pops regardless of income.

Regardless of taxation law, each tax level also carries additional effects for Legitimacy.png legitimacy, pop Political radical.png radicalism, and pop attraction for interest groups Political in government.png in government:

Level	Very low	Low	Medium	High	Very high
Legitimacy.png Legitimacy	+10	+5	—	−10	−20
Political radical.png Radicals from
political movements	−20%	−10%	—	+50%	+100%
Political in government.png Government
IG pop attraction	—	—	—	−10%	−20%
SOL.png Expected
Standard of Living	SOL strata poor.png	−1	−0.5	—	+1.5	+3
SOL strata middle.png	−2	−1.0	—	+2.5	+5
SOL strata upper.png	−3	−1.5	—	+3.5	+7
Unrealized taxes
Effective taxation relies on sufficient Bureaucracy bureaucracy for the country and taxation capacity in each state. Insufficient bureaucracy imposes a country-wide tax waste, which loses a percentage of taxes collected from pops to abstracted corruption or inefficiencies. Individual states can also gain tax waste from State status turmoil.png turmoil. Pops pay the full nominal tax rate, even when some portion of those taxes are lost to waste.

If taxation capacity is insufficient, the deficit percentage of tax is not collected and the pops keep that money. Tax collection can also be reduced by State status obstinance.png obstinance, up to −10% at 20% obstinance (the maximum cap).

National expenses
The types of expenses are:

Construction Goods – The cost of goods required for current construction.
Government Wages – The salary for pops in government buildings. Can be adjusted relative to the normal wage.
Government Slaves – The upkeep of slaves working in government buildings.
Goods for Government Buildings – The cost of goods for government buildings.
Military Wages – The salary for pops serving in the army and navy. Can be adjusted relative to the normal wage.
Goods for Military Buildings – The cost of goods for military buildings.
Welfare Payments – The cost of subsidies paid to pops with wages below the threshold defined by the Social Security institution.
Subsidies – The cost of subsidizing specific buildings to ensure they remain competitive.
Subventions – Costs of subventing import or export of specific goods.
Diplomatic pacts – Expenses paid to other countries such as; an overlord, bankrolling, or war reparations.
Interest – Interest charged on outstanding debt.
Additional Expenses – Expenses from events or other uncategorized sources.
Government and military wages
In addition to setting the base wage, each level of government and military wages has additional effects on the country.

Government wages
Level	Very low	Low	Medium	High	Very high
Wage multiplier	−30%	−15%	—	+15%	+30%
IG intelligensia.pngIG petty bourgeoisie.png Approval	−2	−1	—	+1	+2
Prestige.png Prestige	−20%	−10%	—	—	—
Hud authority.png Authority	—	—	—	+5%	+10%
Military wages
Level	Very low	Low	Medium	High	Very high
Wage multiplier	−30%	−15%	—	+15%	+30%
IG armed forces.png Approval	−2	−1	—	+1	+2
Prestige.png Prestige from army and navy	−20%	−10%	—	+10%	+20%
Training rate	−75%	−50%	—	—	—
Military morale.png Morale recovery	—	—	—	+10%	+20%
References
 See /Victoria 3/game/common/defines/00_defines.txt GOLD_RESERVE_LIMIT_FACTOR = 0.2
 See /Victoria 3/game/common/defines/00_defines.txt COUNTRY_MIN_CREDIT_SCALED and COUNTRY_MIN_CREDIT_BASE
 See /Victoria 3/game/common/static_modifiers/00_code_static_modifiers.txt
 COUNTRY_GDP_MODIFIER_DIVISOR
 Poll taxes calculated as yearly rates on each individual. For example, with Land-Based Taxation at medium level, a pop of 5k peasants pays £67.3 land tax per week.
Game concepts
Pops	Pops • Acceptance • Culture • Migration • Needs • Professions • Religion • Standard of living
Government	Government • Capacities • Characters • Decrees • Institutions • Laws • Technology
Politics	Elections • Ideology • Interest group • Political lobby • Political movement • Political party • Revolution
Economy	Buildings • Goods • Harvest condition • Infrastructure • Market • Production methods • State • Treasury
Diplomacy	Diplomacy • Diplomatic action • Diplomatic play • Power bloc • Ranks • Subjects • Treaties
Warfare	Warfare • Land warfare • Naval warfare • Wargoals • Conscription
Others	Countries • Decisions • Events • Journal • Objectives • Vickypedia
Categories: Potentially outdated1.10Economy
Privacy policyAbout Victoria 3 WikiDisclaimersMobile view
Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0Powered by MediaWiki

Games
Discover
Our Brands
Browse
Play on Paradox technology
Community
Paradox Forums
Paradox Wikis
Support
About
News
About us
Careers
Join our playtests
Media contact
Social Media
Legal Information
EU Online Dispute Resolution
Report Illegal Content
